HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: With
less than
four weeks to Inauguration Day,
we examine
Donald Trump's Cabinet and
compare his choices
to previous presidential picks.
Also ahead, the fall of Aleppo.
After fleeing to safety in
Turkey, Syrian
refugees face a bleak future.
MAN (through translator): If
they want to
work, they will be beggars.
They will live in the street,
and have no
future.
Some lost their sons, others,
daughters and
wives.
For them, there is no meaning to
life.
It is better to die.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus, the
reach of opioids
into elementary school
classrooms.
A West Virginia school partners
with local
law enforcement to find
solutions.
TRACY LEMASTERS, Principal,
Cottageville Elementary:
We assume that everything needs
to be provided
here.
So that means, if they need
clothes, we're
going to give them clothes.
If they need food, we're going
to get them
food.
You know, they need love, we're
giving them
the hug.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
President-elect Donald Trump
has penciled in two more names
on his White
House staff sheet.
He announced today that Thomas
Bossert will
be assistant to the president
for homeland
security and counterterrorism.
Bossert also served under
President George
W. Bush.
And Jason Greenblatt will be
special representative
for international negotiations.
He's now the chief legal officer
for the Trump
Organization.
In the day's other news: Shinzo
Abe became
the first Japanese prime
minister to visit
the USS Arizona Memorial at
Pearl Harbor.
More than 2,300 Americans died
there in the
Japanese attack on December 7,
1941, hurling
the United States into World War
II.
Today, Abe joined President
Obama in a wreath-laying
ceremony before making
statements on the occasion.
SHINZO ABE, Japanese Prime
Minister (through
translator): I offer my sincere
and everlasting
condolences to the souls of
those who lost
their lives here, as well as to
the spirits
of all the brave men and women
whose lives
were taken by a war that
commenced in this
very place, and also to the
souls of the countless
innocent people who became
victims of the
war.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Abe visit
came six months
after President Obama visited
Hiroshima, where
the U.S. dropped the first
atomic bomb.
An outbreak of bird flu in South
Korea is
now that country's worst in a
decade.
The government said today that
the number
of poultry fowl destroyed will
reach 26 million
by tomorrow.
That has resulted in egg
shortages and soaring
prices.
Meanwhile, a region in China has
culled more
than 55,000 chickens and other
poultry.
Russian search teams today
recovered the flight
data recorder from the military
plane that
crashed into the Black Sea.
It turned up a mile off Sochi,
where the plane
went down Sunday, killing all 92
people on
board.
Investigators brought the device
to the surface
and sent it to Moscow.
They say it is not badly
damaged, and could
shed light on what happened to
the plane.
MAXIM SOKOLOV, Russian
Transportation Minister
(through translator): It's too
early to make
any conclusions.
Various causes are being
considered.
We will receive a big part of
the information
from the flight recorder that
was found.
We hope that we will find the
other flight
recorders as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Russian
intelligence officials
have played down the possibility
of terrorism
in the crash.
They're focusing instead on
possible human
error, equipment failure or bad
fuel.
Back in this country, melees
erupted at a
number of shopping malls
nationwide last night.
Cell phone video captured people
getting into
fights in at least 15 malls from
Colorado
to Cleveland.
Spooked shoppers ran for the
exits, and dozens
of people were arrested.
Police are saying troublemakers
may have used
social media to organize the
fights.
On Wall Street today, stocks
moved slightly
higher, in a quiet day of
trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 11
points to close at 19945.
The Nasdaq rose 24, to a new
record close,
and the S&P 500 added five.
And actress Carrie Fisher of
"Star Wars" fame
died today at a Los Angeles
hospital.
She had suffered an apparent
cardiac episode
on a flight from London to Los
Angeles last
Friday.
HARRISON FORD, Actor: What the
hell are you
doing?
CARRIE FISHER, Actress: Somebody
has to save
our skins.
Into the garbage chute, flyboy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was the
role of a lifetime,
and for Carrie Fisher, playing
Princess Leia
Organa defined much of her life.
As she once said: "I have always
been in 'Star
Wars.'
I have never not been in 'Star
Wars.'"
From an early age, she knew
something of Hollywood
fame, as the child of actress
Debbie Reynolds
and singer Eddie Fisher.
CARRIER FISHER: I didn't want to
be different
than other people, and that's
what celebrities
are.
So being a celebrity kid, that's
the dichotomy.
You want to fit in, not stick
out.
CHARLIE ROSE, Host, "The Charlie
Rose Show":
With other celebrity kids.
CARRIER FISHER: No, I wasn't
just around celebrity
kids.
CHARLIE ROSE: Oh, you wanted to
fit in with
other normal people who weren't
celebrity
kids?
CARRIER FISHER: Yes.
My fantasy was to be normal.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fisher began
her own career
in "Shampoo" with Warren Beatty
in 1975.
And then, starting in 1977, the
original "Star
Wars" trilogy made her instantly
famous.
CARRIE FISHER: ®MD+IT /MD-IT /
I'm a member
of the Imperial Senate on a
diplomatic mission
to Alderaan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fisher
returned in 2015's
sequel, "The Force Awakens."
CARRIER FISHER: I like Princess
Leia.
I like how she handles things.
I like how she treats people.
She tells the truth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Her screen
career included
lesser parts as well in "Hannah
and Her Sisters"
and "When Harry Met Sally."
She won notice as a screenwriter
and author,
too, depicting her struggle with
drug addiction
in 1987's "Postcards From the
Edge," her semi-autobiographical
novel and later movie.
ACTRESS: I'm not doing any
drugs.
ACTRESS: We know that, dear.
These are businessmen.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In later
years, Fisher used
her one-woman show, "Wishful
Drinking," to
try to balance enduring fame
with real life.
CARRIER FISHER: This will
really, really impress
you.
I am in the abnormal psychology
textbook.
How cool is that?
Now, keep in mind, I am a PEZ
dispenser, and
I'm in the abnormal psychology
textbook.
Who says you can't have it all?
(LAUGHTER)
(APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Carrie Fisher
was 60 years
old.
Fisher is survived by her
mother, Debbie Reynolds,
as well as a brother and a
daughter.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's
Cabinet and Obama's last days;
an uncertain
road ahead for refugees after
the fall of
Aleppo; the reach of opioids
into elementary
schools; and much more.
We begin with politics tonight
and new questions
surrounding president-elect
Donald Trump's
private foundation.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: 'Tis the season
for charitable
giving, but charity has been a
long-running
and controversial topic for
president-elect
Trump, one that he reignited
last night.
He posted two tweets, staunchly
defending
the Donald J. Trump foundation,
his private
charity, as both generous and
efficient.
But those tweets ricocheted.
Some say they are misleading or
plain false.
So what do we know?
Let's start with this.
Mr. Trump tweeted: "I gave
millions of dollars
to DJT Foundation."
And he did.
Tax filings confirm Mr. Trump
and his companies
donated $6 million of his own
money to the
foundation.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I wanted
to make this out of the goodness
of my heart.
LISA DESJARDINS: But here's the
issue: Timing.
Tax filings show he donated
nothing to the
foundation in recent years.
Instead, most of the
foundation's funding,
about $9.5 million, has come
from outside
donors, including Vince and
Linda McMahon,
the professional wrestling
tycoons.
Linda McMahon is now the Trump
nominee to
head the Small Business
Administration.
The couple gave $5 million in
two years.
Next, this claim from Trump:
that all of his
foundation money is given to
charity.
Again, context is critical here.
Most of Trump Foundation money
did go to nonprofits
or charities, but philanthropy
may not have
been the only motivation.
Public documents show foundation
funds also
went to help settle lawsuits
against Mr. Trump,
or to political allies, as The
Washington
Post's David Fahrenthold
recently explained
to the "NewsHour."
DAVID FAHRENTHOLD, The
Washington Post: They
gave to this group called And
Justice For
All, which is a political
campaign committee
helping Florida Attorney General
Pam Bondi,
who, at the time, just happened
to be considering,
her office was considering
whether to pursue
an investigation against Trump
University.
They, later on, after the money
came in, decided
not to pursue that
investigation.
Trump paid that money out of the
Trump Foundation,
which is against the law.
LISA DESJARDINS: Finally, Trump
tweeted that
his foundation "never paid fees,
rent, salaries
or any expenses."
That is true.
His children serve as the
foundation's board,
and the foundation is run by the
staff of
the Trump Organization, his
business.
Now, that creates an efficient
family charity,
but has raised some serious
questions.
Charities are not supposed to
directly benefit
or overlap with for-profit
businesses like
the Trump Organization, and
that's one reason
the New York state attorney
general is investigating
the charity.
And all that leads us to what's
next for the
Trump Foundation.
The president-elect has
announced he plans
to close it.
But, legally, he's not allowed
to do that
until the New York investigation
is over.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now for more
on the state
of the Trump transition and the
last weeks
of the Obama administration, we
turn to presidential
historian and "NewsHour" regular
Michael Beschloss,
and White House correspondent
and Washington
bureau chief for American Urban
Radio April
Ryan, author of "At Mama's Knee:
Mothers and
Race in Black and White."
Ms. Ryan, I want to start with
you.
It seems President Obama is
still leaving
his mark on his time here with
commutations
from federal prisons, even in
Gitmo some of
the prisoners being transferred
out, obviously
abstaining from the U.N. vote
regarding Israel.
APRIL RYAN, American Urban Radio
Networks:
Well, he's going to be president
until the
very end, January 20, at 12:00,
noon, 2017.
And this president has a legacy
when it comes
to criminal justice.
The commutations, he says, will
be on par
-- the pardons and commutations
will be on
par by the end of his
administration with
other presidents.
But this is a legacy piece that
he wants to
show and make a mark with.
And then when it comes to Gitmo,
that's been
a piece.
He's been wanting to close
Gitmo.
That's been one of those pieces
that just
has not fully worked for him the
way he wanted
it to, but he still -- once
again, he's being
presidential.
And as we were talking, he has
had a day with
the Japanese leader, Abe, and
they're working
on issues of trying to show the
world how
reconciliation could look years
after what
happened at Pearl Harbor and
also talking
about a world without any nukes,
a hope for
that.
So he again is trying to set an
example and
keep his legacy in place as much
as he can
until that last moment that he
is president
in Washington, D.C., next year.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Beschloss, do presidents
try to secure their legacies in
these last
few days?
Are there other historical
examples of presidents
taking significant policy
positions or diplomatic
stances on their way out?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Historian:
Sure they do.
George H.W. Bush in 1992 sent
American troops
into Somalia for humanitarian
reasons, although,
in his case, he called up Bill
Clinton, the
new president, and said, is this
OK with you,
and Bill Clinton said, yes, I'm
for that.
Let's basically be for this
together.
And Dwight Eisenhower before he
left the presidency
in 1961, he broke diplomatic
relations with
Cuba for a long time.
But the difference here is that
you have got
Donald Trump, who began right
after the election
doing all sorts of things that
were new, like,
for instance, the telephone call
to the president
of Taiwan, all sorts of tweets
to make it
clear that someone new is going
to be in charge
with very different views, and
very different
from, for instance, Ronald
Reagan, who waited
until a week after he became
president to
say the Soviets lie, cheat,
commit crimes
to achieve their ends.
But Reagan felt the time to do
that wasn't
during the transition, but right
after he
was president, when he had the
full power
of being in the White House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael, does
that a cooling
effect or does that impact in
any way how
the rest of the world perceives
the abilities
and actions of the current
president?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Sure, it
does.
It muffles what President Obama
is trying
to do.
And in the past, usually, a
president-elect
would be careful about sending a
signal that
there are sort of two presidents
here at once.
Or, for instance, in the
Eisenhower case,
the Bush case that I mentioned,
they usually
tried to at least do it together
with the
president who is still there --
or -- excuse
me -- with the incoming
president.
But we have seen all sorts of
precedents shattered
by Donald Trump, and this is one
more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: April Ryan,
these tweets
and these sort of disagreements
seem to be
happening in public and at the
same time the
incoming White House and the
transition team
say that there is back-channel
communication
that continues between President
Obama and
president-elect Trump.
APRIL RYAN: Right.
And it's very interesting.
I asked some White House
officials about that
communication, and all they
would say is the
fact that it's very interesting
that Donald
Trump during his time running
for the Oval
Office would chastise President
Obama, talk
about Hillary Clinton following
President
Obama, and now he calls
President Obama quite
a bit looking for advice or just
wanting to
talk about issues.
And I find that very
interesting, to the point
where the president, though,
however, no matter
how interesting it is, he makes
it a point
to pick up the phone and call
him as soon
as he can, call him back, just
for the smooth
transition that the president
was afforded
from George W. Bush to his
presidency.
So, this president finds it very
interesting.
And particularly this is a crazy
time, as
they are watching this president
say that
if he were running against
Donald Trump, he
would win, and Donald Trump is
going after
him on social media, saying, I
don't think
so, and then trying to keep the
transition
working.
That's a very interesting piece
by itself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Beschloss, let's
talk a little bit about the
Cabinet, or at
least the announcements so far.
How do they stack up on
different axes, whether
it's gender or race or
socioeconomic status?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Well, even
the most ardent
Trump supporter would have to
say it's not
exactly the most diverse Cabinet
on earth,
a lot of billionaires and
generals in the
close entourage, not a great
deal of -- many
women, not a lot of diversity
here.
And the interesting thing to me
is that John
Kennedy, let's take that
example, he was elected
1960 by only 100,000 popular
votes, and his
electoral vote was about 303,
very close to
Donald Trump's.
Yet, Donald Trump, who didn't
win the popular
vote and the electoral vote like
Kennedy,
you know, unlike Kennedy, feels
that he can
basically do this and doesn't
feel a political
need to, you know, make more of
an effort
with Democrats on the other
side.
Kennedy, in his case, said, you
know, I was
barely elected by the popular
vote.
I would rather make some efforts
to show that
I get along with Republicans.
And so he put Republicans at the
Defense Department,
the Treasury, in key positions
to show that
he recognized that that wasn't
the most resounding
mandate on earth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: April Ryan,
this transition
team has said that they have
been looking
for something different.
APRIL RYAN: Well, yes, they are
looking for
something different, something
totally not
Washington.
And what we're getting from many
persons that
I have talked to, be it Democrat
or Republican,
there is a general consensus
that this is
a business approach to social
problems, and
that, you know, with no
governance really.
There are few people who are in
the Cabinet
who have a governance stance and
government
knowledge, governing knowledge.
But the problem for many is that
this is so
new and so fresh.
And on racial terms, George W.
Bush, I'm thinking
back to that administration.
George W. Bush had the most
diverse racial
construct of his Cabinet.
Now you go to the next
Republican president,
number 45, Donald J. Trump, who
is listening
to his constituency and standing
by what he
said when he was campaigning,
that he didn't
care about being politically
correct.
It's going to be very
interesting to see.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael, how
does this transition,
at least historically, play out,
when you
have perhaps captains of
industry moving into
roles where they're leading
organizations
with thousands of people, but
they're different
kinds of organizations?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: It's one of
the biggest
experiments or even gambles we
have seen in
American history.
Donald Trump's whole thing, and
he said this
in the campaign, is, I don't
think having
political or public service
experience is
particularly helpful.
He essentially said -- he even
essentially
said that he thinks it's harmful
because you're
part of an old establishment
that didn't work.
So, we're about to see whether
this works
or not, and four years from now,
we will know.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
We will have you back then.
Michael Beschloss, April Ryan,
thank you very
much.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Great to see
you.
Thank you.
APRIL RYAN: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When the
Syrian uprising
turned into a civil war in 2012,
the country's
largest city, Aleppo, became a
bastion for
the rebel forces that opposed
the Syrian regime.
After months of Russian
airstrikes, last week,
the Syrian government declared
the entire
city to be within their control.
As Aleppo fell, civilians and
rebels were
escorted out in an historic
evacuation.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson and videographer
Alessandro Pavone traveled to
the Turkish-Syrian
border to meet those who
escaped.
A warning: Some of the images
are disturbing.
JANE FERGUSON: These are the
survivors of
Eastern Aleppo, battered by
years of war and
months of unremitting
airstrikes.
The lucky ones who lived through
the siege
come here to Turkey for medical
treatment.
Shrapnel from an airstrike
smashed into Ahmad's
tiny 4-year-old body.
His father says that his brother
was killed
in the same air raid, and that
he has had
his leg very badly damaged.
Mohanned cradles a severely
wounded hand.
He is just 17, and says he too
was injured
by bombs dropping from the sky.
MOHANNED, Injured in Aleppo
(through translator):
In 11 days, they will do another
operation
on me, and, God willing, when it
is finished,
I will go back.
JANE FERGUSON: Outside a Turkish
hospital
by the border with Syria, the
wounded gather.
Two months ago, she says that
she was hit
with an airstrike, so she has
only just now
managed to get out to Turkey for
treatment.
They came here after fleeing
Aleppo city,
the last major bastion of
revolution and revolt
against Bashar al-Assad's rule
in Syria.
Government forces defeated the
city's remaining
pockets of resistance last
Friday, after a
siege and aerial bombing
campaign by Russian
and Syrian warplanes; 35,000
people, including
the remaining fighters and
civilians, were
evacuated in the last two weeks,
after tense
negotiations.
They joined hundreds of
thousands already
displaced to other
rebel-controlled areas
outside the city.
A convoy of buses leaving the
shattered city
became a symbol of the rebels'
defeat.
It was a somber exodus of people
who once
came close to overthrowing
President Bashar
al-Assad.
One of those who held out to the
end was Salah
Ashkar, an activist from Aleppo.
He spent the final days of the
bombardment
documenting it on social media,
and begging
the outside world for help.
He fled to Turkey just days ago,
still haunted
by what he saw in Aleppo.
SALAH ASHKAR, Activist (through
translator):
Death was following us during
the last days
we spent in Aleppo.
The amount of airstrikes we had
there, I don't
think has been seen anywhere in
the world,
or the types of bombs they
dropped on us.
The Russian airplanes were
constantly in the
air, never leaving.
JANE FERGUSON: But, he says,
help never came.
SALAH ASHKAR (through
translator): The people
of Aleppo lost their faith in
countries that
supported the revolution.
Everyone just watched them
dying.
They watched Aleppo say goodbye
to its people.
No one helped us, without
exception, not America,
not France, not Turkey.
They just watched.
JANE FERGUSON: For Salah, the
revolution is
now over.
A man wanted by the Syrian
regime, if he returns
to Aleppo, he risks arrest,
torture and execution.
SALAH ASHKAR (through
translator): I think
I should search for a safe place
where I can
be free, I can live my life and
express my
opinion freely.
I am searching for a new place
to continue
my studies.
I cannot go back while Assad is
in power.
JANE FERGUSON: Neither can
anyone who fought
with the rebels.
On the outskirts of the Turkish
city of Antakya,
just across the mountains from
Syria, we met
with these two men hiding in an
apartment
after fleeing across the border
two weeks
ago.
Cousins who fought together in
Aleppo, they
were just teenage boys when they
joined the
rebels more than five years ago.
Now they are broken men.
There is no room for bravado
here.
They have lost the will to fight
any longer.
MAN (through translator): Always
there were
airstrikes.
They controlled the whole
situation there.
There was no point in fighting
against them.
It is finished.
I felt like there is no point
staying there.
We could not fight airstrikes
with rifles.
JANE FERGUSON: They have little
hope for the
people who fled rebel-held areas
of Aleppo.
MAN (through translator): They
are homeless,
without a future.
If they want to work, they will
be beggars.
They will live in the street,
and have no
future.
Some lost their sons, others,
daughters and
wives.
For them, there is no meaning to
life.
It is better to die.
JANE FERGUSON: Despite the
dangers, others
are still inside Syria, helping
the people
who have run from the
government's advance.
In an environment too dangerous
for most foreign
aid workers, it is often Syrians
themselves
risking their lives to help
their fellow citizens.
U.S.-based Mercy Corps provides
food and supplies
to many in rebel-held areas.
They are only able to do this
with the help
of those who stayed.
CASEY HARRITY, Mercy Corps: It's
incredibly
risky.
I think it is impossible to
understate the
risks that our Syrian colleagues
and Syrian
NGOs are taking to make sure
that people have
the services that they need.
They are on the front lines of a
conflict
that has not abated and they are
risking their
lives every day to make sure
that these services
reach the people that need them.
JANE FERGUSON: Back at the
hospital in Turkey,
Mehmet Alver, a pharmacist
living nearby,
helps those who come for
treatment.
He has been overwhelmed by the
huge numbers
running away from the
bombardment in Aleppo.
MEHMET ALVER, Pharmacist
(through translator):
I am a human being.
I have children.
I have a heart.
Look at the situation there.
I cannot stay in my house just
watching.
I cannot do that.
This war happening next to me, I
cannot close
my eyes or close my ears or keep
silent.
Tomorrow or in the future, that
might happen
to me.
JANE FERGUSON: After being
bandaged and stitched
back together, these people
can't stay here,
and must now return to Syria.
Most of them will have to stay
in refugee
camps, now that they have lost
their homes
in Aleppo city.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
on the Turkey-Syria border.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
Greek scientist
who claims he can transform
water to energy;
and the best of 2016, starting
with books.
But first: The number of deaths
from opioid
abuse continues to climb,
topping 33,000 in
2015, according to the federal
government.
One of the hardest-hit states is
West Virginia,
where the impact of the opioid
problem can
reach elementary schools.
It's not the students who are
using, but their
parents.
Grandparents, foster parents and
the schools
are figuring out how to cope for
the youngest
kids.
Special correspondent Lisa Stark
with our
partner Education Week traveled
to Jackson
County, West Virginia.
It's the focus of our weekly
education series,
Making the Grade.
A warning to our viewers: Some
of the scenes
may be difficult to watch.
LISA STARK: Emily Durst's
fourth-grade class
is a lively place.
The Cottageville Elementary
School teacher
likes to combine math with
movement and with
music.
So, it's not surprising that
10-year-old Briana
(ph) Sotomayor looks forward to
school and
to learning.
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR, Student: I
love to write.
I write stories all the time.
LISA STARK: Briana came to
Cottageville Elementary
at the end of second grade.
It had been a tough year.
She and her sister Riley (ph)
ricocheted among
four schools and three foster
homes, ending
up at the Sotomayor home.
CARRIE SOTOMAYOR, Mother: They
had reached
a certain point where it was
just they didn't
trust anybody.
They didn't believe anybody.
LISA STARK: For the sisters,
life had had
a rough start, born to a mother
addicted to
drugs, including prescription
pain pills,
and a father in and out of jail.
CARRIE SOTOMAYOR: They were able
to in great
detail tell you how to crush
pain medications
and mix them with water and
inject them, among
other things.
So, they knew far more about it
than I did.
LISA STARK: Carrie and Paul
Sotomayor have
now adopted the girls, and also
a little boy,
Zeke (ph), who had been
neglected as an infant.
Now they're a family.
PAUL SOTOMAYOR, Father: We have
adopted three
children, and, lord willing, one
more.
LISA STARK: Like Briana and
Riley, the fourth
child they hope to adopt, a boy,
3 months
old, was also born to a
drug-addicted mother.
CARRIE SOTOMAYOR: When we
brought him through
the door, Riley just burst into
tears and
said, how could anybody have
done drugs and
hurt this little baby?
And it just -- it broke her
heart.
LISA STARK: The impact of the
opioid epidemic
on children, parents almost
dying from pain
pills, fentanyl or heroin, has
been on graphic
display in pictures released by
law enforcement.
The epidemic has hit hard in
West Virginia.
With more parents abusing drugs,
the number
of children placed in foster
care has jumped
24 percent in five years, to
more than 5,000.
Here in Jackson County, local
officials saw
a spike in overdoses among
adults after this
aluminum factory shut down in
2009, throwing
hundreds out of work.
Unemployment is just one of the
risk factors
that puts West Virginia right at
the heart
of the opioid epidemic.
It's also a state with dangerous
jobs, not
just manufacturing, but coal
mining.
Workers get injured.
They are prescribed powerful
opioids for pain
relief.
That can begin a cycle of
addiction.
Jackson County Sheriff Tony
Boggs, who is
part of a community task force
to combat drug
abuse, says heroin is now his
number one drug
problem, after marijuana.
TONY BOGGS, Jackson County
Sheriff: I think
in the mid- to late- '90s,
OxyContin was a
huge ordeal.
It was prescribed, in my
opinion, way out
of control.
It got a lot of people addicted.
Once it starts drying up, then
they have to
have something to turn to.
It's whatever's easiest and
readily available,
and that has become heroin.
LISA STARK: This has not gone
unnoticed at
Cottageville Elementary.
TRACY LEMASTERS, Principal,
Cottageville Elementary:
We definitely see that impact.
No one is waking them up to get
them to school.
They're often late because their
parents are
sleeping in because they had
partied too late
the night before.
The child has no food.
They are hungry when they enter
the building.
They don't want to go home on
the weekends.
LISA STARK: Principal Tracy
LeMasters, who
holds a hallway huddle with her
staff every
morning, regularly checks the
local paper
to see if any of her students'
parents have
been arrested, so she and the
teachers can
be ready to help that child.
TRACY LEMASTERS: It can be very
heartbreaking.
You know, I have -- I have
preschool students
that, freely, at mealtime, talk
about their
mommies or daddies being in
jail.
LISA STARK: And under a new
program here,
called Handle With Care, law
enforcement now
contacts the school districts if
they have
an interaction with a family
overnight.
TONY BOGGS: They will know that,
hey, that
kid had a rough night last
night.
There's a reason that they're
acting out in
school today, or there's a
reason they are
not here today.
LISA STARK: At Cottageville
Elementary, the
percentage of low-income
students is so high,
over 90 percent, that everyone
gets a free
breakfast and lunch.
The school's 137 students come
from the surrounding
neighborhoods, including three
nearby trailer
parks.
Principal LeMasters figures
about a third
of her students do not live with
their biological
parents, mainly due to drug
abuse.
How does that impact you as a
principal of
a school, running a school?
TRACY LEMASTERS: We assume that
everything
needs to be provided here.
So that means, if they need
clothes, we're
going to give them clothes.
If they need food, we're going
to get them
food.
You know, they need love, we're
giving them
the hug.
LISA STARK: School counselor
Robin Corbin
meets with kids three days a
week.
It's not enough.
The school could use her full
time.
It's not in the budget.
So, Corbin last year began
enlisting help,
turning to employees of a local
plastics company
to become mentors for students
who needed
extra support.
The kids see it as a weekly
half-hour of fun,
but it's really much more.
What are you hoping to
accomplish with this
program?
ROBIN CORBIN, School Counselor:
Just someone
else in their life that they can
depend on.
That was one of the main things
that we ask
of these mentors, is that they
be reliable
and dependable.
If they say they're going to be
here Tuesday
11:30, please be here Tuesday
11:30.
And they have been fantastic
with that.
That's something that these
children don't
have and don't see, an adult
that they can
depend on.
LISA STARK: And like many school
districts
nationwide, this one
participates in a national
drug prevention education week,
holding an
essay and poster contest.
WOMAN: Next, we will have our
essay award
presentation.
LISA STARK: And among the
winners, Briana
Sotomayor, whose essay spoke
volumes.
Do you mind reading us what you
wrote?
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR: Sure.
LISA STARK: Is that OK?
LISA STARK: OK.
I'm going to give you -- this is
your winning
essay.
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR: OK.
"A Better Life."
"There once was this woman who
was on drugs,
and I was her daughter.
Now she is very sick."
LISA STARK: Briana goes on to
talk about her
ambitions: to be a gymnastics
teacher, to
have a husband and children, to
stay away
from drugs.
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR: "If I grew up
to be like
my biological mom, I wouldn't
get any of these
things."
PAUL SOTOMAYOR: It was
definitely heart-touching,
and to see a girl, especially 10
years old,
to really just be honest.
LISA STARK: For Briana and her
sister, Riley,
there's a community helping them
move beyond
their past, from their new mom
and dad, to
the educators who nurture them.
When I come back and talk to you
when you're
20 years old or 30 years old,
what's going
to -- what is Briana going to be
like then?
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR: Well, I'm
going to be old.
(LAUGHTER)
LISA STARK: You will be.
BRIANA SOTOMAYOR: But,
hopefully, I won't
be on drugs, and I will be
succeeding in my
priorities and just succeeding
in life.
LISA STARK: That's a lesson
these schools
are trying to teach all their
students.
In Jackson County, West
Virginia, I'm Lisa
Stark of Education Week,
reporting for the
"PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now a look at
some of the
outstanding books of 2016.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now a look at
some of the
outstanding books of 2016.
Jeffrey Brown sat down recently
with bestselling
authors Jacqueline Woodson, the
2016 National
Book Award winner for fiction,
and Daniel
Pink, at Politics & Prose, a
popular bookstore
here in Washington, D.C.
For Daniel Pink, the highlight
of the year
was Matthew Desmond's "Evicted:
Poverty and
Profit in the American city."
DANIEL PINK, Author: This is an
incredible
book.
It's by a guy named Matthew
Desmond, who is
a sociologist at Harvard.
But this is not a dry, academic
book.
In fact, it almost reads like a
novel, a very
harrowing novel.
He spent about a year living in
two different
low-income parts of Milwaukee.
And this book, I think, shines a
light on
things that middle-class people
don't really
understand.
First of all, most low-income
people in this
country do not live in public
housing.
They operate in the private
rental market.
The second thing is that they're
spending
60 percent, 70 percent,
sometimes 80 percent
of their income on housing.
And it's not sustainable.
And so what happens, they scrape
together
money for a deposit.
They pay the first month's rent.
Then they can't sustain it and
they get evicted.
And so these evictions are
happening not in
thousands, but by the millions.
It's actually a virus in the
system.
And so I consider this book in
the same kind
of historical tradition as James
Agee's "Let
Us Now Praise Famous Men,"
Michael Harrington's
"The Other America."
I think this book, if you have a
friend who
is a public official, hand him
or her this
book.
It's that important.
And this book raises some
serious questions
about what kind of country do we
want to be.
JEFFREY BROWN: This wasn't on
your list, but
you know this book?
JACQUELINE WOODSON, Author: Yes.
I'm just dittoing everything he
says about
it.
It's such an important book.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
So, what do you want to start
with?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: So, I want
the start with
"Ghost" by Jason Reynolds, which
is considered
a -- quote, unquote --
"middle-grade book,"
but it's for anyone who has ever
had a family,
ever loved running, ever felt
outside of a
place.
And this book does everything.
So, my 8-year-old loves it.
My 14-year-old loves it.
I love it.
And it just crosses a lot of
boundaries in
beautiful ways.
And it's about a young boy who
joins a track
team.
And he comes from an underserved
family, a
single mom and finds a new
family in this
track team, but also becomes
this amazing
runner, and has started out by
running away
from this tragedy that happens
in his family.
I won't give it away.
But it's such a satisfying
story, and you
meet all of these amazing young
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
DANIEL PINK: So, I'm going to
give this to
my 14-year-old runner.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Oh, cool.
DANIEL PINK: But I will read it
first.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Dan,
next?
DANIEL PINK: Well, I have got
this book right
here.
It's "March: Book Three" by John
Lewis and
a couple of colleagues.
This is actually a graphic
memoir.
It's the third book in a trilogy
that John
Lewis, the legendary civil
rights figure,
the current Georgia congressman
wrote.
JEFFREY BROWN: He lived it.
DANIEL PINK: He lived it.
And this is about an
extraordinary moment
in time.
It's 1963 to 1965.
And the tumultuousness of that
period is breathtaking.
And it's captured, because of
the form, I
think, in this incredibly
cinematic way.
This is a book about violence
perpetrated
against people because of their
skin color.
This is a book about
irregularities in our
voting system and the integrity
of our democratic
process.
This is a book about a world
that seems like
it's spinning out of control.
So, it's endlessly relevant.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: I completely
agree.
I think that's such an important
book.
DANIEL PINK: And what is
interesting is that
John Lewis actually got
interested initially
in the civil rights movement
because of a
comic book.
So part of it, he's paying
homage to this
tradition that you can tell
serious stories
and talk about serious issues in
graphic form.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Jacqueline, number
two?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: While we're
talking about
graphics, I have to bring up
Ta-Nehisi Coates'
"Black Panther."
He was the first black superhero
in 1966.
T'Challa comes from a fictional
place in Africa
and is this amazing superhero.
It's about a lot of stuff that
we're talking
about now.
It's about race.
It's about power.
It's about just trying to change
the world.
And it's fascinating.
So, I am a big Black Panther
fan, even though
I wasn't as a child.
I didn't read comic books.
I read "Mad" magazine.
But I have turned a corner.
DANIEL PINK: "Mad" magazine is
like one of
my few formative experiences,
absolutely.
"Mad" magazine teaches a whole
generation
of people to be irreverent
toward power.
(LAUGHTER)
JACQUELINE WOODSON: It's so
true, that question
of, you can really do that?
DANIEL PINK: Yes, and get away
with it, and
you actually make money it from
too.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Daniel Pink, number three?
DANIEL PINK: So, I have got this
one here,
this terrific book called "Lab
Girl."
When I read this book, and I
loved it, I was
thinking about the pitch meeting
for this
book, because I can't imagine it
went all
that well, because this is a
memoir of a geobiologist.
I can't imagine people jumping
up and down
over this.
But what I love about this book
is that this
is a great book about science.
And there is this one scene in
there that
I find just unforgettable, where
she's working
for her Ph.D., and she discovers
something
that nobody ever imagined.
And in that moment, she realizes
that, an
hour ago, nobody knew this
thing, and she
knew it.
And even more than that, at that
moment, she
is the only person on the planet
who knows
this thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, it's
scientific discovery.
DANIEL PINK: I mean, it's
thrilling.
I love this book.
I think it's an important book
now.
I don't think that science has
had a good
year.
I don't think women have had a
good year.
So a book by a woman scientist
is a great
pickup for the end of the year.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Jacqueline, what
is in your last for this section
of our time?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: OK.
This is a book, "You Can't Touch
My Hair,"
Phoebe Robinson.
And I was torn in choosing this
over the other
two books, because of -- they're
all phenomenal.
And I will talk about the other
two later.
But it was because I didn't
think this got
the attention that it deserved
to get.
And people don't know about it.
And it's a book about race.
It's a book about what it means
to grow up
female in this country and
female and black.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean, the whole
title, "You
Can't Touch My Hair and Other
Things I Still
Have to Explain."
JACQUELINE WOODSON: "Things I
Still Have to
Explain."
And, basically, she is talking
about what
happens when you grow up black,
and you have
to explain your hair, right?
You have to explain people
wanting to put
their hands in your hair.
You have to explain your body.
You have to explain -- she ends
up being the
only black girl at an all-white
school.
And so there's a lot of
explaining that goes
into being African-American,
also dates interracially
and has to kind of explain that
to the black
community.
But it's this dialogue that I
think we're
finally beginning to have across
lines of
race.
And she makes people feel safer
talking about
race.
So I think it's kind of the
gateway into having
these bigger dialogues that we
need to have
in this country, given where
this country
is right now.
So, "You Can't Touch My Hair,"
Phoebe Robinson,
it's funny.
It's thoughtful.
She's wickedly brilliant and
comes to the
table with everything from Queen
Latifah,
to NWA, to Obama, Oprah.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
We will continue the discussion
online with
lots more recommendations.
And I will invite the audience
to join us
there later on.
For now, Jacqueline Woodson,
Daniel Pink,
thanks very much.
DANIEL PINK: Thanks, Jeff.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right now on
our Web site,
find holiday book
recommendations from "NewsHour"
staff.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tomorrow on the program,
Jeff looks at
some of 2016's best television
programs.
He talks with Eric Deggans of
NPR and Andrew
Sepinwall of the Web site the
Uproxx about
the hundreds of shows now
available, what
some call too much TV.
ERIC DEGGANS, National Public
Radio: Well,
what's amazing about this moment
is, not only
do we have a lot of quantity.
We do have a lot of quality,
because that
quantity is coming from media
outlets or from
TV outlets that are trying the
build their
brand by creating great
television.
So, we have Hulu.
We have Amazon.
We have Netflix.
And it's all supposed to be very
well done.
They're not just pumping shows
out there to
put them out there.
They're trying to do great work.
And that means that, for fans,
there's a wide
array of shows out there.
And you can pick and choose
according to your
very specific taste, and come up
with a list
of top 10 or top 12 that's
totally different
from anything that Alan and I
pick.
And all of those shows would
also be great,
too.
ALAN SEPINWALL, Uproxx: So, we
do this television
critics poll where we reach out
to about 60
TV critics across the country,
including Eric,
and we ask them to name their 10
favorite
shows of the year.
And I get the ballots back, and
I haven't
even heard of some of these
shows, and it's
my job to watch television.
That's how much great stuff is
out there.
It's ridiculous.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clearly, my
apologies to
Alan, not Andrew, Sepinwall from
Uproxx.
Before we go, another lens on
the migrants
and refugee crisis.
This year has already proven to
be the deadliest
yet for those trying to reach
Europe by crossing
the Mediterranean.
The United Nations' latest
numbers show some
5,000 people have died so far in
2016.
Among the reasons for that
spike, people setting
off in increasingly flimsy, less
seaworthy
boats.
Later tonight on PBS,
"Frontline" profiles
the perils of the journey,
including cell
phone video shot by the refugees
themselves
as their boat which left Turkey
takes on water.
Here's a short excerpt from
"Exodus," a two-hour
PBS "Frontline" special.
Here's a short excerpt from
"Exodus," a two-hour
PBS "Frontline" special.
HASSAN, Syrian Refugee: There
was a kid who
was sitting right in front of me
on the boat.
HASSAN, Syrian Refugee: There
was a kid who
was sitting right in front of me
on the boat.
And to be seeing the fear, and
it's not -- I
mean, first, we're young men.
We can handle it.
We can do it.
But to see that, like, to see
that kids are
going through this, and they're
crying for
help, they're pleading for you
to help them
or do something, it was like
literally -- it
was like, just do something.
And he was crying.
To see, to witness that is just
hard.
After half-an-hour, the coast
guards showed
up.
The Turkish coast guard showed
And they -- we all got on the --
we were rescued,
all of us.
Luckily, no one died.
No one drowned.
And we were taken back to the
coast guard
station.
The treatment was good.
They gave us food and water.
And then, after a while, we --
after they
took our information, they
released us after
like a couple of hours.
And we went back to Ismiah (ph),
back to square
one.
HARI SREENIVASAN: "Frontline"
airs tonight
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern on most PBS
stations.
Online, read our tribute to
acclaimed astronomer
and pioneering feminist Vera
Rubin, who died
on Sunday.
Rubin's work provided the first
convincing
evidence of dark matter and
showed that the
mysterious material makes up 90
percent of
our universe.
Find all that and more at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, Race Matters
Solutions: progress
in a segregated New York City
school.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.